

=== PAGE 1 ===
                                            WCMS      UNIT-1
2M:

1.What   iscontent  management      system?
   ●   A CMS    is an application  that is used  to manage    content,  allowing  multiple  contributors  to
       create, edit and  publish.
   ●   The  definition  of a  CMS    is an  application   (web-  based),   that provides   capabilities  for
       multiple users  with different permission   levels  to manage    (allor a section  of)content,  data
       orinformation   ofa  website  project, or intranet application.
   ●   Managing    content   refers   to creating,   editing,  archiving,  publishing,   collaborating  on,
       reporting, distributing website  content,  data and  information.

2.What   are the common     functions  of CMS?
   ●   Content   creation  allows  users  to easily create  and  format content
   ●   Content   storage   stores content  in one  place, in a consistent  fashion
   ●   Workflows    assigns   permissions    for managing    content  based    on roles  such  as  authors,
       editors and  admins
   ●   Publishing   tellsthe  software  when   and where   the content  should  go  live
   ●   Optimization    helps you  improve   digitalexperience   and  learn from  your  content

3.What   are the types  of content  management     system?
   ●   Component    Content   Management     System   (CCMS)
   ●   Document    Management     System   (DMS)
   ●   Enterprise  Content  Management      System   (ECM)
   ●   Web  Content   Management     System   (WCMS)
   ●   DigitalAsset  Management      System   (DAM)

4.Define  web   content  management     System?
   ●   A Web   Content  Management      System   (WCMS)    is a software  system   that enables  the  users
       tocreate,  manage    and deploy   content  on web  pages.
   ●   Itisa  type of content  management     system   (CMS)   that provides  an  organization  with a way
       to manage     digital information   on  a  website   through   creating  and  maintaining    content
       without prior knowledge    of web  programming     ormarkup    languages.
                                              Or
   ●   The  Web   Content  Management      System   (WCMS)     isa computer   application  used  to create,
       edit,manage    and  publish content  onto  a website  in an  organized  manner.

5.What   are the types  of WCMS?
   ●   Offline processing:     This type  of WCMS     processes   content  before  publishing  itto the live
       server.
   ●   Online   processing:     Online   processing    systems    employ    templates    on  demand     and
       whenever   the user  adds  content  to a webpage    for publication.





                                                                                                        21746

=== PAGE 2 ===
   ●   Hybrid    processing:     Hybrid   processing    systems    use  a  combination    of  offline and  online
       processing.

6.Define
a) CMA
=The   content   management      application   (CMA)    is a  user  interface  that  enables   users   --such   as
marketers   and   content  creators   -- to design,  create,  modify   and  remove   content   from  the  website
without  needing   help  from  the IT  department.

b) CDA
=The   content   delivery  application   (CDA)    provides   back-end    services   that take   the content   that
users  create  in the CMA    and  turn  itinto the website   that visitors can   access.

7.Define   DAM.
   ●   With   a  digital asset   management       system,   users   can   store,  organize,   and   share   digital
       content  with  ease.
   ●   A  DAM    offers  a  simple,  centralized    library where   clients,  employees,     or contractors   can
       access   digital content.   These    assets  include   audio,  creative   files,video,  documents,     and
       presentations.
   ●   A DAM    is cloud-based,    so  users  can  access   content   from  anywhere.

8.What   is the  difference  between    WCMS     and   CMS.
                        WCMS                                                       CMS

   Speciﬁcally  designed   to manage   web  content.          Broader  than  WCMS,   itcan  manage    content
                                                                 across  various platforms,  not just web.

     Primarily  used for creating, managing,   and           Can  be used  for managing    documents,   digital
           deploying  content  on  websites.                assets, records,  and  other content  types  across
                                                           different environments    (e.g.,intranets, extranets,
                                                                                   web).

  Best suited  forbusinesses    orindividuals  looking      Suitable  fororganizations   needing  to manage    a
           to establish an  online presence.                  variety ofcontent  types  and  workﬂows,   both
                                                                            online  and oﬄine.

      Offers  numerous    plugins/extensions   for          May   have  modules/plugins    forvarious  content
           enhancing   website  functionality.                    management      and enterprise  needs.

9.What   is content   and  content   format?
   ●   Content:    On   the  Internet,  content  is any   information   that  is available  for retrieval  by  the
       user,  including   web    pages,   images,    music,    audio,  white   papers,   drivers   and   software
       downloads     as well as  training, educational    and  reference   materials   .









                                                                                                               21746

=== PAGE 3 ===
   ●   Content    Format:    These   are  the  ways   you  present   your  content  to your  audience,    based
       on  itsmedium,    style, or layout.  For  example,   you  might   have  content   formats  such  as  text,
       video,  audio,  image,  infographic,   or carousel.

10. Mention   any  four Text  fileformats.
   ➔   .htm/.html/  files
   ➔   .xml files
   ➔   .doc  files
   ➔   .odt files
   ➔   .pdf files

11. Mention   any  four common     graphic  file formats.
   ➔   .bmp  files
   ➔   .cgm  files
   ➔   .giffiles
   ➔   .jpeg/.jpg files
   ➔   .JAS   files
   ➔   PICT   files
   ➔   .tifffiles

12. Write  various  standards   defined   by Moving    Picture Experts   Group.
MPEG-1    - VHS-quality,   commonly     used  for Video   CD  (VCD)   and  CD-ROM.
MPEG-2    - DVD-quality,   commonly     used   forDVD,   digital television,  set-top boxes,   etc.
MPEG-4     -Scalable   delivery,  used  in various   applications   including  the  Internet, cell phones    and
television.
MPEG-4     isa  patented   collection  of methods    defining  compression.    Itwas   used  for  compression
of web-based     audio/video    streaming    data  and   CD   distribution,  voice  (telephone,   videophone)
and  broadcast   television  applications.  36  Web   Products   and  Services

13. What   isdigital graphics?
=Digital graphics   are  visual  images    or objects  that  are  displayed   on  a digital device   such   as a
computer.
They  often  combine    both  pictures  and  text  to gain the  attention  of viewers  on  a website   or digital
space.
Or
Digital graphics    combine    art and   technology    to  communicate      ideas  through    images    and  the
layout  of web   screens   and  printed   pages.   All digitalimages    are either  raster  graphics  or  vector
graphics.

14. What   israster  Graphics?
=Raster   graphics    (also  called  a  bitmap)   is a  way   to construct   a  picture  using  small   building
blocks  called  pixels.  When   enough    pixels  are  included   close  together,  your  eye   stops  seeing  a
collection  of different  points  and   starts seeing   a  whole   image.   Digital photographs     are  always
rasterized.

                                                                                                             21746

=== PAGE 4 ===
15. What   is vector   graphics?
=Vector    graphics    use   mathematical       geometric     elements     (points,   lines,  curves,   circles,   and
polygons)    to  create    pictures.   Because      vector   images     are   simply   visual   representations      of
geometric    concepts    (as  opposed    to  raster files) they  can  be  made    infinitely large  or small  without
losing  image   quality.

16. List advantages     and   disadvantages      of raster  graphics.
=Advantages          of  Raster     Graphics

   ●   High  Detail: Raster  graphics   can display  highly detailed  images   with  subtle gradations   of color,
       making   them   ideal for complex   images   like photographs.
   ●   Realism:   They  can  accurately  represent   real-world  scenes  and  textures  due  to their abilityto
       handle   a wide  range  of colors and  details.
   ●   Rich  Color  Representation:   Raster  graphics   can  support  millions  of colors, allowing  for vibrant and
       detailed  images.
   ●   Compatibility:   Raster  graphics  formats   likeJPEG,   PNG,  GIF, and  BMP   are widely  supported   across
       different  platforms  and  applications.

Disadvantages           of  Raster     Graphics


   ●   Large  Files: High-resolution   raster images   can  result in large ﬁle sizes, which   can  be problematic
       for storage  and  transmission.
   ●   Loss  of Quality:  Scaling  raster images   up or down   can  lead  to loss of quality and  pixelation
       because    they are resolution-dependent.     Enlarging  a raster image   makes   the  pixels more   visible,
       resulting  ina  blocky  appearance.
   ●   Complex    Editing: Certain  types  of edits, such  as changing   the  shape  of an  object within  the image,
       can  be more   diﬃcult  with  raster graphics  compared     to vector graphics.
   ●   High  Memory    Usage:   Large  raster images   can  consume    a signiﬁcant   amount   of memory    when
       being  processed    or edited, which  can  slow  down   performance    on  less powerful   devices.

17. List advantages     and   disadvantages      of vector  graphics.
=Advantages          of  Vector     Graphics

   ●   Inﬁnite  Scalability: Vector  graphics  can  be scaled   up or down   to any  size without  loss of quality.
       This  makes   them   ideal for logos  and other  graphics   that need  to be resized  frequently.
   ●   Resolution   Independence:    They   maintain  their clarity and crispness   at any  resolution, making   them
       perfect  for both  print and digital media.
   ●   Smaller   Files:Vector  ﬁles  are typically smaller  than  raster ﬁles because    they only  store the
       mathematical     equations   deﬁning  the  shapes,  not  information  about   each  individual pixel.
   ●   Eﬃcient   Storage:  The  simplicity  of the data  invector  ﬁles  allows  for eﬃcient  storage   and  faster
       loading  times.
   ●   Easy  Editing: Individual  elements   in vector  graphics  can  be easily  edited and  manipulated    without
       affecting  the rest of the  image.  This  makes   them  highly  ﬂexible  fordesign   changes.

                                                                                                                   21746

=== PAGE 5 ===
   ●   Precision: The  mathematical    nature  of vector graphics  allows  for precise control  over shapes,
       lines,and  colors.


Disadvantages          of  Vector     Graphics


   ●   Less  Detail:Vector  graphics  are not  as effective at representing  detailed  and complex   images,
       such  as photographs,   due  to theirreliance  on shapes   and lines rather than  pixels.
   ●   Complex   Designs:  Creating  very detailed  and  realisticimages   can be  challenging  and
       time-consuming    in vector format.
   ●   Print Challenges:  While  vector graphics  are  excellent for large format  printing,some   print
       workﬂows    and  devices  may  prefer raster images,  necessitating   conversion  which   can sometimes
       introduce  errors.
   ●   Limited  Format  Compatibility:  Although   vector formats   likeSVG,  AI,and  EPS  are common,    they are
       not as universally  supported   as raster formats  like JPEG  or PNG.

18. Why   do  you  need   to connect   content  types   and  formats?
   ●   First, ithelps   you  create   consistent   and   coherent   content   experiences    for your  audience,
       by  ensuring   that your  content  matches    their expectations,    needs,   and  preferences.
   ●   Second,    ithelps  you   optimize  your   content  for search   engines    and  social  media,   by  using
       the appropriate    formats   and  metadata    for each  channel   and   platform.
   ●   Third,  it helps   you   manage     your   content   more    efficiently  and   effectively, by   reducing
       duplication,  simplifying   updates,   and  enabling   reuse  and   repurposing    ofyour  content.

19. List best  practices  for digital graphics.
       Limit the  number    of typefaces   used.
       Go  with  a “less is more”   approach.
       Play  with scale.
       Reuse   design   elements.
       Mixing  proportionate    images   and   texts draws   viewers’   eyes  to specific  areas  of the  design.

20. What   is audio  editing?  Mention    the use  of audio  editing.
=Audio   editing   is the  process    of manipulating     sound   recordings.    This  can   be  done   for many
reasons,   such   as  to improve   the  quality  of the recording,   to remove    unwanted     noise  or sounds,
or to change   the  length  or pitch of a  particular audio   clip.
Uses:
   ●   Improve   the  quality of your  audio   content.
   ●   Make   your  audio   content  more   engaging.
   ●   Save   time  and  money.

21. Mention   the  types  of audio  editing.
22. What   is cutting and   fading?
23. What   is fading  and  mixing?


                                                                                                               21746

=== PAGE 6 ===
=There  are  three main  types  of audio  editing: cutting, fading, and  mixing.
   ●   Cutting  is the  most  basic  type  of audio  editing. To cut an  audio  file,select the  portion  of
       the file you  want  to  remove   and  then  delete  it.This  is often used   to remove     unwanted
       sections  from a recording,  such   as pauses   or mistakes.
   ●   Fading   is used   to smooth    out  abrupt  changes    in volume.   For  example,    ifyou  have   a
       recording  of someone     speaking   and  there is a sudden    loud noise,  you  can  use   fading to
       gradually  reduce  the recording   volume  until the noise  isgone.
   ●   Mixing   is used   to combine    multiple  audio   filesinto  one.  This  is often  used   to create
       background    music  for a video or podcast.   For example,   you  could  mix several  tracks
       tocreate  an  instrumental  version  of a song.

24. What  are  the benefits  ofaudio  editing?
   ➔   Improve  the  quality of your audio  content.
   ➔   Make  your  audio  content  more   engaging.
   ➔   Save  time  and money.

25. Listand  briefly explain  any two  audio  editing tool.
   ➔   Audacity  – it does  almost  everything  you  want,  and  it’sopen-source.   Ittends  to be  peoples
       ’go to’product.
   ➔   WavePad    –  WavePad     is an audio   editing software   developed   by  NCH    Software   forboth
       Windows    and macOS.
   ➔   Apple  Garage    Band   –  GarageBand      is a digital audio   workstation   developed   by  Apple,
       available for macOS    and  iOS.

LONG     ANSWER        QUESTIONS:

1.Explain  the  various types  of content  management      systems.  (6)
=TYPES    OF  CONTENT      MANAGEMENT         SYSTEMS:
1.Component      Content   Management       System   (CCMS)
A component     content   management     system,   or  CCMS,    differs from  a  standard   CMS    in that it
organizes  content   at a granular  level. Instead  of managing   content  page   by page,  ittakes  words,
phrases,  paragraphs,   or photos  and  stores  them  in a central  repository.

2.Document     Management       System   (DMS)
Paper  is almost  extinct.Tracking   business   fileson paper  is a thing of the past.  A document
management     system   (DMS)    offers a paperless   solution  to manage,   store,  and  track documents
in a cloud.  It provides  an  automated     solution for uploading,   processing,   and  sharing  business
documents    without the  hassle  ofprinting, copying,  or scanning.

3.Enterprise    Content   Management      System    (ECM)
An  enterprise  content   management      system   collects, organizes,   and  delivers  an  organization’s
documentation,    ensuring   critical information   is delivered  to  the correct  audience    (employees,
customers,   business  stakeholders,   etc.)
                                                                                                         21746

=== PAGE 7 ===
4.Web   Content    Management      System    (WCMS)
A WCMS     lets users  manage    digitalcomponents     of a website  without  prior knowledge    of
markup   languages   or web   programming.    A  WCMS     provides  collaboration,  authoring,  and
administration  tools to help  manage    digitalcontent.  Unlike  other  CMSs,   which  deal  with
content  destined  for both  the web  and  print, a WCMS     handles  exclusively   web  content.
5.Digital  Asset   Management      System    (DAM)
With  a digital asset   management      system,  users   can  store, organize,   and  share   digitalcontent
with ease.   A DAM    offers  a simple,  centralized   library where   clients, employees,    or contractors
can  access   digital content.  These   assets   include  audio,   creative  files,video,  documents,     and
presentations.  A  DAM   is cloud-based,   so  users  can  access  content  from  anywhere.

2.Explain   the features  of web  content  management      systems.   (6)
=The  three  key  features   of any  WCMS     are  as follows:
   ●   The  abilityto design,  create  and  maintain  personalized    content  fora  website.
   ●   The  abilityfor editors to review  and  approve   content  prior to publication.
   ●   An automated    publishing   process.

Additional   features   that a WCMS     might   include  are:

Automated,     standard   templates.    Provides  users  with  templates  that they  can  easily add  new   or
existing content  to, rather than  designing   theirown   templates.
Editing  tools.  Enables   users  to create and  customize    content,  such  as adding   titlesand  headers
toimprove   content  structure,  or designing   webpages    with drag-and-drop    tools.
Easily  installs  plugins.   Gives   users  the  ability to extend   a site's functionality  with plugins   or
modules.
Software   updates.   Keeps   the  WCMS     up to current  web  standards   by  updating  software.
Workflow    management.        Ensures   that  authorized   users   review   and  approve    content   before
publishing.
Collaboration    tools. Enables   multiple  users  to modify  content.
Document      management.       Enables   businesses     to manage     the  document     lifecycle, including
creation, revisions,  publication, archive  and  removal.
Multilingual.  Enables   the  display of content  in various  languages.
Versioning.   Enables   editors  toretrieve  previous  versions  of content.

3.What   are  the Advantages    of using  WCMS?     (4)
=A  WCMS    benefits   businesses     in the following   ways:
Low  cost.  A  WCMS    is typically inexpensive,   often being  free or offering  subscriptions  that
outweigh   overall costs.
Easy  to use.  Most   WCMS    options  are  user-friendly  forpeople   who  do  not have  a  technical
coding  background    to create  or maintain  content.
Easily  customizable.    A  WCMS     creates  a universal  layout  that enables  beginner   users  to
create and  customize    front ends  easily.



                                                                                                          21746

=== PAGE 8 ===
Workflow    management.       Administrators   can  control  and  personalize    workflow  management      in a
WCMS.     Some   WCMS      options  enable   administrators   to  set up  their own  workflow   management
rules and  provide  them   with a series  of steps  to set up  each  task.
Search   engine   optimization    (SEO).   A WCMS     provides   businesses    with the  editing tools
required  to  improve   search   engine   ranking.   The  WCMS      should   enable   users  to  easily create
content  with the  correct keywords,    provide  meta   information  -- such  as description,
keywords   and  alternative  text for images   --and   linkcontent   within the text.
4.What   are  the disadvantages     of using  WCMS?     (4)
High  cost  for larger  implementations.       A WCMS     for larger companies     can  be expensive
because   itmay   require  extensive  training  and  certifications. WCMS     maintenance     can also
be expensive    because   the  software  may   require  upgrades   and  licensing  updates.
Latency   issues.   Larger  systems    can  become    slower  with  time if the business   does  not  keep  the
hardware   up  to date or  ifthe cache   filesgrow  too  large.
Security   risks.  If an  administrator   does   not  regularly  patch  the  WCMS      for security  threats, it
remains   vulnerable    to hackers.    To  minimize    security  risks, administrators    must   monitor   and
maintain  the  many   moving   parts of a  WCMS     --such  as  the web   server  software,  MySQL    and  any
plugins  or add-ons.

5.Explain   the various  popular   content  types.  (4/6)
=Content    types  are   the  categories   or  classifications  of  your  content,   based   on   itspurpose,
function,  or characteristics.   For  example,    you   might   have   content  types   such   as  blog  posts,
products,  events,  testimonials,  or FAQs.

Most  popular  types  of content:
The  best  websites   create  a mix  of different content   types  to keep   their readers  interested.  While
there  are  hundreds    of different  types  of web   content   some   of the  important   content   types  are
mentioned   below:

Articles:
Articles are a type  of web   content  that explore  a specific  idea  or topic in detail.They   often include
interviews  with  experts,   quotes   from   various   sources,   and  data   to back   up  the  main   points.
Articles are  usually   longer  than  other   types  of online  content,   typically ranging   from   1,000  to
3,000  words.  This  length  allows  fora  thorough   exploration  of the subject.

Blog posts:
Blog  posts  are short  articles typically between    500  and  750  words   long. They   cover  a wide  range
of subjects,  including  industry   news,  profiles  of important   people,  and  reviews   of new   products.
Blog  posts  are designed    to be  quick  and  easy  to read,  providing  useful  or interesting  information
in a concise   format.  They  aim   to engage   readers   with timely  and  relevant   content  without  being
too lengthy.

Surveys:
Surveys   are   a  valuable   addition  to  your   content,  as   they  gauge    reader   interest  and  boost
engagement      with  your  brand.   They   are   interactive  and   fun,  making    them   one  of  the  most

                                                                                                            21746

=== PAGE 9 ===
engaging   types   of content  for  your audience.    This  helps  create  a stronger   connection   with  your
readers.

Quizzes:
Quizzes   engage   your  readers   by  presenting  a  question  on  one  page   and  the answer   on  the next.
This setup   increases   the  chances    of ad  revenue   and   click-throughs,   making   quizzes   a fun  and
effective way  to interact  with your  audience.

Photos
Images    help  make    your  content   more   visually  appealing,    and  contribute   to  the  overall  user
experience.   Additionally,  optimizing   your   photos   with alt-text  and  captions   to your  images    can
even  help  with your  rankings  on  Google   Images.

Videos
Using  videos   isa  great way   to diversify your  content  and  add  visual  interest to your  pages.These
can  be videos   you  take  yourself  or videos  from   sources   likeYouTube    or Vimeo.   (Just  make   sure
togive  credit where   credit is due.)

E-books:
E-books   offer your  readers   more   detailed  information   that they  can  download    or read  directly on
your  site.They   enhance    your   regular  content  and   help  establish  your  company    as  an  expert  in
your field. Promoting   an  e-book   isa great  way   tobuild  your  brand's  authority.

Book  reviews:
Book  reviews   let you  share   your  thoughts   on  books   you've  read  about   a specific  topic. Be  sure
not to spoil any  surprises   inthe  story. You  can  also ask  your  readers   about  their favorite books   to
boost  engagement.

Product  reviews:
Product   reviews   are  a great   perk  of having   a successful    blog  or website,   as companies     often
send  you  products    for free to review.  You   can  also buy   products   to review,  avoiding  any  ethical
issues  that come   with accepting   free gifts.

Recipes:
Who   doesn’t  like cooking?    Just  make   sure  that  you  only  post  original recipes.  While  ingredient
listsaren’t subject  to  copyright  restrictions, the  instructions  on how   to cook  a dish  are.So,  ensure
your  cooking    instructions  are  your   own   to avoid   legal  issues.  Sharing    original recipes   adds
uniqueness    and  authenticity  to your content,  making    itmore  valuable   to your  audience.

Announcements:
Do  you  have  a  new  employee,    product,  or even   some   new  swag?    Let your  readers  know   about   it
inan  announcement      post.  Market   your  site as the  place  readers  can  learn  about  news   from  your
company    before  any  other  source.



                                                                                                            21746

=== PAGE 10 ===
FAQs
Everyone    has  questions.    A  FAQ   (frequently   asked   questions)   page   is one  of  the best  content
types  to help  address    common     questions   all in one   place.  This  helps  you  better  manage     your
time and  not  have  to answer   the  same   question   over  and  over  again

6.Explain   the various   types  ofcontent   formats  in WCMS.     (4/6)
7.Explain   various  text fileformats.(4/6)
8.Explain   various  graphics   fileformats.(4/6)
9.Explain   various  audio  fileformats.(4/6)

=CONTENT       FORMATS:
These   are  the ways    you  present   your  content   to your  audience,   based   on  itsmedium,    style,  or
layout.  For   example,    you   might   have   content    formats   such   as   text, video,   audio,   image,
infographic,  or carousel.

Text File  Formats:
Plain text files usually have   the extension   ‘.txt’.They  are  also called  ASCII   text filesand  can  be
viewed  with  an  editor (such  as  Edit or Notepad)    or with a Word   Processor    (such  as  MS  Word   or
Word   Perfect). ASCII   stands  for American    Standard    Code   forInformation   Interchange.    Itwas
used  for character   representation   in computers.    However,    the ASCII   has  now  been   replaced   by
Unicode.   The  characteristic  feature  of plain ‘.txt’filesis that they  do  not allow  any  kind of
formatting  on  the document    (such   as bold,  italics,font colour, images,   etc).

   ❖   .htm/.html/  files
These   filesare  also text files that deserve   a special  mention   as  they are  the ‘language’   in
which  web   pages   are authored.   ‘html’ stands  for Hyper   Text  Markup   Language.    The   code  of
a web  page   is written in plain text and  is saved   with the  extension   ‘.htm/.html’. The  web
browsers   (such  as  Mozilla  Firefox, Internet  Explorer,  Google   Chrome,    etc.) identify the  fileas
a web  page,   read  the code   and  display  iton the  screen  as  we  see  itwith  the images,   colours
and  hyperlinks.

   ❖   .xml files
XML,   or  eXtensible   Markup     Language,    is a  text-based    format  derived   from   SGML    (Standard
Generalized    Markup   Language).     It'sused  for storing  and  exchanging     data.  XML   is versatile and
commonly     used  for structuring   information   in various  web   products   and  services,   facilitatingthe
exchange    of formatted   documents    between    different systems.

   ❖   .doc  files
A very  common     format  found  on  PCs,  for formatted   text files,‘.doc’ stands   fordocument
files.These   filesmay   be  created,  viewed   and  edited  using  programs    such  as  MS  Word.
Several  formatting   features  such  as  bold, italics,justification, bulleting, etc. are  possible.  Itis
a proprietary  format  of Microsoft.

   ❖   .odt files

                                                                                                             21746

=== PAGE 11 ===
ODT   stands  for Open   Document     Text. It ispart  of the Open   Document     Format   (ODF)
originally developed    by Sun   Microsystems    Inc., but  now  maintained    by Organization    for the
Advancement     of Structured   Information   Standards    (OASIS).   It isan  XML   based   format.  The
filesuse  ‘.odt’fileextension.   They   are originally  supported   by  Open   Office and  the  Star
Office word   processor.  ODT    format  includes  several   XML   filesand   configuration  files in
zipped  format.  A zip  fileisa  collection of many   files. These   filescan  be  viewed   with any
archive  managing    software,   likeWinzip.

   ❖   .pdf files
‘PDF’  stands  for Portable   Document    Format.   This  fileformat  was   developed    by Adobe
Systems   in order  to make   itpossible   to transfer formatted   documents     over  the Internet  so
that their appearance    would   not change    on any  system.   The   biggest  advantage    of .pdf files
isthat itallows  for printing  of web  pages   – page   by page   as  though  it isa document     file.This
filetype requires   pdf reader  for viewing   e.g. Adobe   Acrobat,   XPDF,   etc. This  software   can  be
downloaded     from  the Internet. .ps  files‘PS’  stands  for ‘Post Script’  files.Itis also an  ASCII
filetype that is technically  plain  text.However,    itis unreadable    unless  an  on-screen   viewer
like‘Ghostscript’  or  any  other postscript  viewer   isused.

Graphic   Files:
Graphic  file formats  are  many   in number.   Images   are  most  important   feature  of
web  pages   or any  kind  of publishing.  Itadds   value  as well  as attracts  the readers.  In the  Web
parlance,  images   have   to be capable   of downloading     quickly, they  should   not be  bulky, though
the original resolution  should   be  preserved.
There  are  several  Graphic   fileformats.  Graphic   styles  may   be divided  into two  major   types:
•Raster   Graphics
•Vector  Graphics

Raster  Graphics:   Raster   Graphics/Images     are  collection  of dots or pixels.  They  are  also called  as
bitmaps.  The   colour of each   pixel is described   by one   or more  information   33  Collaborative
Content  Development      channels   – separated    into the primary   hues  – Red,   Green   and  Blue  or in a
Single  stream   of  colour  mapped     data.  Raster   images    are  simple  images    and  are  hence   most
suitable  for interoperability.  However,    the  primary   disadvantage     is that  they  do  not scale   well.
Scaling  may   lead to a  loss of resolution  and  hence   poorer   picture quality.

Vector  Graphics:   The  more   complicated    of the two  is Vector  Graphics.   They  define  an  image   as  a
collection  of vector  equations.   The   advantage    of  vector  graphics   is that it gives  smooth   curves
and  lines irrespective   of the  size  of the  image   or resolution.   However,    the disadvantage     is that
they take  longer  to draw  and   require  more  storage   space.

   ❖   .bmp  files :
Bitmap   filesor .bmp   files are  the standard   Windows     Raster   format.  These   files lay emphasis    on
quick  display.  They  store  images    in the  uncompressed      form.  The   obvious   trade  off is that bmp
filesoccupy   lot of space.   These   filesare  quickly  downloadable     but on  each  transfer  over  network
the quality of picture  is lost.

                                                                                                             21746

=== PAGE 12 ===
   ❖   .cgm  files
 Computer     Graphics    Metafile   (CGM)     is an  ANSI    standard    graphic   fileformat   for  2D   vector
graphics   and   raster   graphics.   CGM     is  a  metafile   that  is a  file containing    information   that
describes   or specifies  another   file.Therefore,   itholds  data  and  information   for reconstructing
graphical  images.   Itwas   originally designed    and  used  for clip art libraries, but is now  mainly
used  for technical  applications   such  as  CAD   drawings.

   ❖   .giffiles
One  of  the most   popular   graphic  fileformats   on  the Internet,  Graphic   Interchange    Files (.gif)was
developed    by  CompuServe      with  the  main  purpose    of archiving   information.  The   .gifimages    are
usually  scanned   stand-alone    pictures  that are  not ‘drawn’  using   an application   Program.

   ❖   .jpeg/.jpg files
JPEG    stands    for  Joint   Photographic      Experts    Group    that  designed     this  format    for  high
compression.    It isone   of the most   popular   image   formats   on  the Web.   Itdiscards   extra data  and
hence   has  good  compression     capabilities.  Itis a web   standard   and  stores  images   in small  size. It
isuseful   when   large  numbers    of  filesare  to  be  incorporated   and   support   millions  of colours.  It
has  better compression     in photographs    as  compared    to .gif

   ❖   .JAS   files
JAS  format   is from  JASC    Inc. This  fileformat   isdesigned    to create   the smallest   possible  image
filefor  24  bits  per  pixel  colour  images    and   8  bits per  pixel  gray   scale  images.    Saving   and
retrieving an   image   using  the  JAS   fileformat   will result in some   loss  of image   data.  It has  very
high level of compression.

   ❖   PICT   files
This is the  standard   Apple   Macintosh    graphic  fileformat.  It isaccepted    by many    applications  and
imported/exported     using  clipboard  (cut, copy,  paste)  to almost   any  text or graphics   program.   Raw
filesThis  flexible format   consists  of a  stream   of bytes  that describes    the color  information   in the
file.Each  pixel is described   in binary  format  where   0=black   and   255=white.   This  format  is used   to
transfer documents     between    different applications.

   ❖   .tifffiles
TIFF  stands   for Tagged    Image   File Format.   This  format  was   designed    to overcome    the  problem
of application  dependence.      Itwas  originally  designed   to become    the  standard   format.  The  format
was  intended    to be  capable    of handling   just  about  any   possibility. This  fileformat   is generally
used  when    graphic   filesneed   to be  moved    between    different computer    types   (For example:    PC
to Mac   and  viceversa).   These   files allow  for high resolution   and  are supported    by  most  scanning
and   image    editing  software.    This  format    works   well  for  both   on-screen    display   and    print
photographs.    This  format   differentiates  among    three  categories    of images    i.e.black  and   white,
grayscaled,   and  colour.

Audio   File Formats:

                                                                                                              21746

=== PAGE 13 ===
Sound    files or  audio    files are   gaining   popularity   on  the   Web.   Today,    most   of  the  latest
soundtracks    are available   on the  Internet  as sound   files. There  are  even  a  few albums    that have
their presence    only  on  the  Web.   Another   popular   application  is online  live news    broadcasting.
There  are  audio   enabled   websites.   The  following  section   discusses   some   of the  common     audio
fileformats.

   ❖   .au files
Itis a simple   audio   fileformat  which   is most   commonly     found  on  the Web.   It isrequired   by  PC
users  to load  applications   such  as  Waveform    Hold   and  Modify  (WHAM)     to play  these  files.Macs
need  different sound   applications   to play this filetype.

   ❖   .mid files
The  .mid  fileextension    is the standard    extension   used   by MIDI   music   files.MIDI   is a technical
standard   for Musical   Instrument   Digital  Interface.  These   are  used  mostly   in audio  control  in the
multimedia   industry.  The   MID  files are  used  by  a variety  of music   authoring   programs    and  MIDI
hardware   devices

   ❖   .MIDI  filespecification  allows  for lengths  to be  specified  as a  variable number    of bytes.

   ❖   .aifffiles
Audio  Interchange    File Format   (aiff)was   developed    by Apple.  Although   itwas   originally made   for
Macs,   now   itcan  be  used   by  other  platforms   too. It is a good   audio  file format  for use   on  the
Internet. Itcan  also  be used   inmultimedia    authoring   on both  Macs   and  Windows.

   ❖   .mp3
MP3   stands  for MPEG     layer  three. It iscurrently  the  most  popular   audio  file format.  Itshallmark
isits CD  quality  of music.  MP3    allows  forvery  high  levels 35  Collaborative   Content   Development
of compression.     A  minute   of music   may   constitute  approximately     1 Mb   file.An  MP3    player, is
readily available  on  both  Macs   and  Windows,    isrequired   to play this filetype.

   ❖   .voc files
Creative  Lab’s   Sound   Blaster  uses   the  .VOC   file.They   are  designed    for storing  digitized voice
data  and  hence   the  name.   They   can   also handle   any   digitised sound    in any  format.  The   VOC
fileshave   a two   part structure.  The   header   block  which   defines  the  contents   of the fileand   the
data block  which   actually contains   the audio  information.

   ❖   .wav
 Wav   fileis a  commonly     used  file format  on  Windows    machines.    It can  be  used  on  the Internet
and   is  good   for  multimedia     authoring.    It is  flexible  and   handles    both   compressed      and
uncompressed      storage  formats.   Video  Files  Formats   Video   fileshave   become    most  popular   with
films being   available  and   viewed   on  VCDs    and   DVDs.    However    within  a  multimedia    lab, itis
important   to be   aware   of  the video   fileformats   as  these   are  the  most   disk  space-occupying
(bulky) types.



                                                                                                            21746

=== PAGE 14 ===
   ❖   .avi files
Audio-Video    Interleave   (AVI)   file format  was   developed     by  Microsoft.   It is called  ‘Interleave’
because   the  video  and  audio   are  bound   together  in chunks.   The  AVI  fileformat   isa very  popular
video  fileformat  and   many   videos   have  been   produced    in the format.  AVI  files can  be opened    in
most  of the  video  players  such   as VLC   (Video  LAN   Client), RealPlayer,    and  Microsoft’s  Windows
Media  Player.

   ❖   .mov/.movie    files
Movie   files  are  the  common      format   used    in QuickTime     movies.    It is a  multimedia    format
developed    by  Apple.  Originally,  itwas  designed    for Apple   machines    but now   itis widely  used   in
websites   forstreaming    audio  or video.

   ❖   .mpg/.mpeg     files
This  is another   standard    format.  This  format   uses   MPEG     compression     scheme    of  audio  and
visual (AV)  digital data.  MPEG    video  is a series  of video  standards   defined  by  the Moving    Picture
Experts  Group   (MPEG)     External  Link.

10. Write  a note  on  content  tools. (4/6)
=Content   Tools  (Media-wise)    :
Content   creation  involves  human    intellect, but tools  enhance    efficiency in expressing    ideas. Text,
graphics,   audio,  and   video   are  common     mediums,     each   requiring   specific  tools for  creation.
These   tools empower     creators  to effectively  convey   their thoughts   and   ideas  to theiraudience    in
diverse  and  engaging    formats.
Based   on the  form  of media,  tools  can  be categorized    as:

•Text  editing tools
•Graphic   editing  tools
•Audio   capture  and  editing  tools
•Video   capture  and  editing  tools

Text  Editing   Tools:   Text   editors  are  software   used   in Desktop    Publishing    (DTP).   These   are
editors such   as  MS-Office   Suite,  Open   Office  Suite  and  Star  Office, etc.  They  include   packages
to type  text  and  also  proof  read.  Other   than  this, they  also  contain  packages     for presentation,
spread   sheets   and   database    for powerful   presentation,    calculation,  and   storage   and  retrieval
respectively.  A  lotof literature already   exists  which  requires   retro-conversion   from  print to digital.
Optical  Character     Recognition    (OCR)     technology    is used   to  convert   printed   text  to digital.
Software   likeOmni   Page   Pro,  Text Bridge,   Abbyy   FineReader,    etc. are OCR    software   available  in
the market.   However,     nowadays     scanners    come   with  basic  OCR    utilitywhich   can  be  used   for
lightweight  text editing.

Graphic    Editing   Tools    : DTP    is supplemented      by  effective  use   of graphics    (images).   This
includes   capturing   the image    and  processing    it in a  presentable    format.  This  requires   use   of
capture   devices   like camera    (ordinary   as  well as  digital camera),    scanners    and   data  transfer
cables.  Once    an  image   is captured    itis to  be  converted   to  usable  format   and  size.  However,

                                                                                                             21746

=== PAGE 15 ===
sometimes    value  addition  to the  image  is also  done   by touching   up  the image.   For  the purpose,
software  like  Adobe   Photoshop,     Corel  Draw,   etc. are  widely  used   by  professionals.   However,
GIMP   (GNU   Image   Manipulation    Program)   is also a  powerful  tool to edit graphics  available  under
Open-  Source   License.

Audio   Capture   and  Editing   Tools:  Sound   has  more   pneumonic    property   than text and  graphics.
Hence,   libraries are   going  more   and   more   towards    recording   and  collecting  audio   materials.
Audio   can   be   recorded    with  a  recorder    which   is  inbuilt in  Mobile   phones,    Dictaphones,
Computers,    etc. These    are  affordable  devices   used   commonly     in day-to-day   affairs. However,
there are  very  costly studios  with  various  kinds  of mixers   and  error correction  devices   which  are
also available  and  are  used  in professional   recording  and  music.   Audio  Capture   Card  is available
in the present   day   computers    which   can  be  used   for recording.  The   card  is connected    with  a
Microphone    which   records   input  and  feeds   to the card.  There   are  inbuilt utilitysoftware  in the
operating   system   which   can  be  used   to record   and  save   the voice.  Professional   software   like
Authorware,   WavePad,     Goldwave,    etc. can  be used   to create mixing   effect.

Video   Capture     and   Editing    Tools:   Libraries   have   lot of  recorded    presentations    in  their
collections. The   recording   of any  event   iscaptured   with  the help  of a  video  camera.   Nowadays
video  camera   directly  record  in computer    readable   format,  therefore,  there  isno  need   to attach
Video  Capture   Card   with the computer.   For  editing the  video  there are  many   options  available  for
example,    CyberLink    PowerDirector,     Corel  Video    Studio   ProX4,   Adobe    Premiere    Elements,
MAGIX    Movie   Edit Pro,  VideoPad,    Pinnacle   31  Collaborative   Content   Development     Studio   HD,
Roxio  Creator,  Sony   Vegas    Movie   Studio  Platinum,   Roxio   Video  Lab,  ShowBiz    DVD   and   many
such  others.

11. How   tocreate  digital graphics?   (6)
=Most   graphic   designs   today  are  digital, created   on  computers.    The   elements   of  the  graphic
design  are arranged   in an  attractive manner    using  specialized  graphics   software.  Once   the digital
graphic  design   is complete,   itmay   be  printed  with  a computer    printer, or sent  to a  commercial
printer.

Things  You'll Need:
   ●   Computer
   ●   Graphics   software
   ●   Pencil  and  paper
   ●   Printer
   ●   Photo  or illustration,optional
   ●   Scanner,   optional

Step  1
Prepare   your  design  idea  with pencil  and  paper.  Decide   what   words,  images,   colors  and  shapes
to use  in your  digital graphic  design.  Use   the pencil  to make   a  few  rough  sketches   of how   your
design  should   look. Try several   different layouts,  combining   the  typography,   images   and   shapes
in an attractive  manner    that effectively  communicates      your message.     Color  information  may   be

                                                                                                           21746

=== PAGE 16 ===
noted  to the  side  of the rough   sketch,  or added    using  color  pencils. These    are quick  sketches   to
develop   your design   idea,  not finished  designs.

Step  2
Turn  on  your  computer    and  open   a filein a  graphics   program.   Among     the more   popular   graphic
design  programs    are  InDesign,   Photoshop     and  Illustratorfrom  the  Adobe   software   company,    and
Corel  Graphics   Suite.  Open   Office Draw   may   be  downloaded     for free (see  Resources).

Step  3
Name    the file and  save   it.Type   in the  words   you  will use  in your   design.  Select   a font  for the
words.   Resize   the words    and  place  them   according    to your   rough  pencil  sketch.   Select  a  new
color for the  words   ifindicated  in your  rough  sketch.  Your   words  have   become    typography    for the
purpose   of your  digitalgraphic   design.

Step  4
Import  any   existing  photo   or illustration  filesyou   need   into  your  digital graphics   fileusing   the
design  software's   "Import  File"  feature. If you  only  have  a  hard  copy  of the  photo,  use  a scanner
to create  a digital file.After  importing,  resize  as  needed    and  position  in your  design   as  per your
rough  pencil  sketch.   You  may   also  simply   open   the photo   or illustration file,copy  it and  paste  it
directly into your  digitalgraphics   file.

Step  5
Use  the  tab features   in the design   software   to add  graphic   and  color elements    as per  your  rough
pencil sketch.  Borders   may   be  added   to photos,  for example.    A variety  of shapes   may   be  added
and  colorized  as  needed.

Step  6
Print out  a copy   of your  digital graphic   design   to check   it.Make   changes    as  desired.  Print your
finalcopy   or  copies,  or copy   your  project  onto   a CD   or memory     card  and  have   itcommercially
printed. In some   cases,   you  may   be able  to email  the project  directly to a  commercial    printer.

12. Explain  needs   and   general  guidelines   for content  development.     (4)
=Needs:
In the  vast world   of online  information,   both  users  and   hosts  face  challenges.   Users   struggle  to
find relevant   information   due   to its sheer   volume    and  inconsistent   presentation.    Hosts   aim  to
attract target   audiences    but   face  difficulties in organizing    content   effectively.  Standards    and
guidelines   have   emerged     to  address    these   issues,   focusing   on   structuring   documents     and
presentation.   Content    creation   for the  web   requires   adapting    to  user  behavior,   with  concise,
easily scannable    content.   Hosts  must   also  consider   content  quality, ensuring   it'strustworthy   and
safe. Standardization    is crucial for global  accessibility  and  interoperability,  enabling   easy  reuse  of
information  across   platforms   and  languages.








                                                                                                              21746

=== PAGE 17 ===
Some   General   Guidelines    :
When    using  the  internet   and  electronic   documents,     people   often  face  problems    like  filesnot
working   together,   slow  downloads,     and   hard-to-understand      content.  To   make   sure   users  get
good  quality, content  creators   should  follow  some   basic  rules.
According   to  Jacob   Neilson,  a  web   content  analyst,  the  content  developers    should   take  care  of
the following  points:

i)Well-tested   and  widely  used  packages    in designing   web   pages   should  be  used.  It.is better to
avoid  recently  released  software,   especially  ifthere  is use  of plug-ins  such  as  Flash  or PDF.  A
good  rule  isnot  to use  upgraded    versions   immediately    tillthey mature.   Software   vendors   require
time to fix theirbugs   and  offer reasonably    reliable versions.  It also gives  users  time  to upgrade.

ii)As  far as  possible  Scripts  in web   pages   should   be avoided.   Adding    code  means    that there  is
also a  risk of bugs  (or faults). If scripts are  a must,   then  they should   be  tested and   debugged    on
all combinations      of  platforms    and   browser    versions.    Norms    and    Guidelines    for  Content
Development     333  Content   Development.

iii)Itisadvisable   to have  simple  point-and-click   web   navigation.  Special   menu   controls  often  fail,
especially  for users  who  move    their mouse   fast or who   have  motor   skillimpairments.

iv)The  website   should   always  be  made   as  compact    in size as  possible.  Itis good  to have   spare
server  capacity  so  that your  sitecan  cope   with traffic surges.

v) Server   software   must   be  robust.  When     selecting  vendors,   ensuring   code   quality  must   be  a
priority.

13. Explain  the  content  development     guidelines   according   to Mick  Wood.   (6)
=According    to Mick  Wood,    following  guidelines   help  content  developers    to-cater  for the needs   of
allInternet  users.

Screen    Layout    Screen   layout   should   be  consistent.   The   more   consistent   a  website   is in its
design,  the easier   itwillbe  for users  to navigate.   Users,  especially  persistent  users,  tend  to learn
and  remember    the  location  of key, functions  and   controls.

Logos   Screen    layout  should  include  logos,  navigation   buttons  and  footer  information.   Putting the
logo  in a consistent   place   on every   page   (usually  top  left)ensures    that visitors are  fully aware
that they are  on  the same   site.

Update    Information    'Page   Last  Updated'   information   needs    to be included.   Visitors will quickly
know   ifyou  have   added   any  new   content  to your  site, and  itimay   prompt   you  to do so.  The  date
format  should   be  understandable,      i.e.,1st  February    2003   is better  that 02-01-2003.In     the UK
02-01-03   means    2nd  January   2003  and   inUSA    itmeans   1SI  February   2003.





                                                                                                             21746

=== PAGE 18 ===
Links   A  link to  the  home   page    should   be  added   to  every  page   except   the  homepage      itself.
Pages   should  not  link to themselves    as this can  confuse   some   users.  Making    your logo  the  home
page  link isconsidered    to be  a good   practice.

Image   Sizes   Considerable    number    of Internet  users  stilluse  modems     with connection    speeds   of
33K  or  less. Pages    should   therefore  be  kept  to a  maximum     of 35K   ensuring   download.times     of
less  than  ten  seconds    for  these   users.  Visitors  may    not  wait if your  pages    take  too  long  to
download.    All images,   including  spacer   images,    should   include  alternative  text. The   alternative
text should  describe   the function  of the  image,  ifapplicable:

Use   of  Frames    should    not be   used  unless   absolutely   necessary.    Frame-based      sites  can  be
confusing   for the visually  disabled,  particularly  those  using  -screen   readers   or speech   browsers   -
users  can   easily  become     disorientated,   Additionally,   users  cannot   easily  bookmark     individual
pages  within  a frame-based     site.

Page   Title Each   page   should   have   a  descriptive  and   different title,clear  and  helpful  headings,
and  a logical  structure.  Titles are used   by  search   engines   to identify web   'pages,  If two or  more.
pages  have   the same    titlethey cannot   easily be  differentiated  by  users.

Font  Attributes    The   FONT    tag  should   generally   be  avoided    IIIcreating   accessible   websites.
While  attribute  specifications    like SIZE="+    1"  or  SIZE="   -1"  are  relatively harmless,    absolute
sizes  like SIZE="l"   can  result in  text that is too  small  to read.   Instead:  Cascading    Style  Sheets
should  be  used   to font web   pages.   Style sheets   allow authors   to suggest   relative changes    in font
size with much    greater  flexibilitythan is allowed   under  FONT.

Color  Attributes    The   COLOR     attribute  of the FONT    tag  should   always   be avoided    since  many
browsers   stilldisplay  the  font  color when    the  user  tries to override  author   specified  colors.  The
result could   be  an   unreadable    document     if the  font  color  does   not contrast   well  against   the
reader's  chosen   background.

Text  Size   and    Font   Text   should   be  the   equivalent   of  size  12  points   to  enhance    reading
performance.    Research     has  shown    that  there  is no  noticeable    difference  in  reading   speed   or
user  preference   between    Times   New   Roman,    Georgia    or other  serif fonts and  Helvetica,   Arial or
other  sans-serif  fonts.  The  FACE    attribute of the  FONT    tag  cannot   be overridden    by  the user  in
many   browsers.    This  may   result in the  author  choosing    a font that  is very difficult to read  given
the user's  platform   and  environment     settings.  The  same    font may   display  strangely   on  different
platforms.

Link  Identification    Links  should   be  Clearly  identified  and  it should  make    sense   when   reading
out of context.  Links  should   never   be designated    with  the  text 'clickhere'.  Some   screen   readers
can  be  set to read  out  a listof links  on a  particular  page;  a listof 'click here' links is not helpful.  .
Blue  underlined   text is the  preferred  choice   for alllinks. Some    users  miss   links because   the  text
isnot  underlined.   Research    shows    that users  can  easily  find links which  include  visual  cues,  that



                                                                                                             21746

=== PAGE 19 ===
is,links  that  are  underlined,   rather  than   having   to move    the  mouse    to see   when   the  pointer
changes   to a hand   (this isknown    as mine   sweeping).

 Visited   links  should   be  designated    using   a different  colour.  Many    users   use  link colours   to
identify which  parts  of a site they have   already  visited.

Page   Display.   Pages   should   be  fluid flexible because    users  browse   the  Internet  using  a variety
of screen   resolutions.  Pages    should   be  designed   to  expand   or  contract  according   to  the user's
settings,  thus  preventing    horizontal   scrolling.  Horizontal   scrolling  is. a  particular  problem    for
screen  reader   users  because    the  screen   reader  does  not  automatically   scroll horizontally  - users
may  miss  important   content.

Device   Independence       Pages    should   be  device   independent.    Not   allusers   navigate   websites
using  a  mouse    - many    disabled   users  use   Assistive   Technology.    All users  should   be   able  to
navigate   the  site using  the  input  device  of  their choice.  Keyboard     shortcuts,  using   the 'access
key' attribute, should  be  provided   for key  links.

Readability    Paragraphs      and   sentences     should   be   kept  short.   Readability   improves     when
sentences   'and  paragraphs    are  kept  relatively short. Users   tend  to scan  web   pages   and  willoften
skip over  large chunks    of text.

While  these   guidelines   aren't formal,  hosts   of electronic  documents     should   stilladhere  to them.
Content   and   organization   issues   are  being   looked   at closely  to establish   standard   norms    and
guidelines   for  content    development.      Organizations     like  the   International   Organization     for
Standardization    (ISO)  are  involved  in this process.   For  instance,  ISO  8879   deals  with SGML,    the
Standard    Markup    Language     for  the  web,   and   has  been    adopted    by  initiatives like the  Text
Encoding   and  Interchange    (TEI)  for structuring  web  documents.

14. Explain  steps  involved   in the audio  editing  process.(4)
=There   are four  main  steps  involved   inthe  basics  of audio  editing:
   ●   Selection
   ●   Editing
   ●   Processing
   ●   Output

Selection   is the  firststep  in audio  editing. This  is where   you  identify the portion  of the audio   that
you  want  to edit, and  itcan  be done   manually   or with  the help  of software   tools.

Next   is Editing,    where    you   make    changes     to  the  selected   audio.   Again,   many    different
techniques   can  be  used  here,  and  the  exact  method   will depend   on  the software   being  used.

Processing     is the  third step,  where   you   add  effects  or make    other  changes    to the  processed
audio.   Several   different   plugins   or  software    programs     can   be   used   for  this. Most    audio
processing   programs     willoffer  a suite  of tools  to help  you  get  the  sound   you  need.   These   can

                                                                                                             21746

=== PAGE 20 ===
include  EQ,  compression,     limiting, reverb,  and  delay.  There   are  many   different ways   to process
audio, so  it'simportant  to find a  program   that offers the  specific tools  required  for your  project.

Output,   where   you   save  the  edited  audio   file.The  most   common     audio   formats  are  WAV    and
MP3,   but there  are  many   others.  WAV   files are  uncompressed      and  willtake  up  more   space  than
MP3   files.They   are best  suited for applications   where   sound   quality is paramount,    such  as music
editing or DVD    authoring.  MP3    filesare  compressed     and  will take  up  less space   than  WAV   files.
They   are  ideal for  applications   where   filesize  is crucial,  such   as streaming    audio  or  portable
devices.






















































































                                                                                                            21746